So when you're building a user interface,
something that you'll need to do quite
often is have elements appear and
disappear in a more graceful
way than if they just got rendered to the
DOM and then got yanked out of the DOM.
Because that can be jarring for users.
And so right now in this application,
we have a checkbox
that is linked to whether or
not this paragraph element gets rendered.
If we toggle it, it appears and
then it disappears.
What we want to happen is for
that element to fade in and fade out.
And we can do that in Svelte
with an element transition.
First we need to import the transition
from svelte/transition, and
that looks like this.
And then all we need to do is add
the transition directive to our paragraph
element.
And now when we toggle
the value of visible,
we can see that the element
gracefully fades in and fades out.
It won't get removed from the DOM
until the outro has completed.
And we can parameterize
these transitions as well.
Let's turn our fade transition
into a fly transition.
And give it some options.
We'll give it a y value and a duration.
Now, when I toggle this checkbox,
the element is gonna fly in and
it's gonna fly out.
Now you'll notice that as I'm
interacting with this checkbox,
the transition is reversible.
If we change the value of visible while
the element is introing or outroing,
it won't restart it, it'll gracefully
pick up from where it left off.
And so in that way, we're able to build
fairly robust but slick user interfaces.
And that would be pretty difficult to
do if you were writing it by hand.
Because there's a lot of really complex
state that you need to keep track of.
We can also have different intro and
outro transitions.
So the transition is bidirectional, but
we might wanna have something
that flies in and then fades out.
So I'll add fade back into our component.
And then we'll turn this transition
into an in, and then we'll add an out.
And then we'll just pass
it the fade function.
Flies in, Fades out.
And again,
if you fade out while it's flying in,
it'll combine those transitions so
that you get a graceful effect.
If you make it visible while it's fading
out, then it will have to restart,
because it doesn't have a way of
composing those transitions in reverse.
But that's a pretty rare situation.
So there's a bunch of
built in transitions.
We have fade, fly, scale,
slide, and they all do more or
less what their name suggests.
But we can also create our
own custom transitions.
So this is what the transition
function looks like.
This is how the fade
transition is implemented.
The first argument of the function is
the mode that is gonna be transitioned.
The second is the set of
options that were passed in.
And then the body of the function does
whatever calculation that it needs to to
get information about
the current state of the node.
Ie, what it's gonna look like
in its non-transitioning state.
And then it returns an object containing
some information that Svelte will use to
construct and apply the transition.
So we're gonna return a delay value and
a duration value,
which basically are basically
gonna be whatever gets passed in.
And here is the most interesting part,
the CSS property is a method
that takes in a t value,
which is a value between 0 and 1, and
returns some CSS that is
calculated from that t value.
0 means that the element
is fully off screen,
1 means that the element
is fully rendered.
And so in between there,
we can see how you can interpolate in
such a way that you generate
the illusion of a smooth transition.
And so the fade transition is literally
just the t value between 0 and
1 multiplied by the element's
default opacity.
So if you start with an element
that has an opacity of 0.5,
then halfway through the transition,
the opacity of the element will be 0.25.
You can also return other things,
including a tick function,
which will execute
JavaScript on each frame.
But most of the time,
we'll be using CSS transitions
because it's better for performance.
Very often when you're doing
motion in JavaScript applications,
what you'll find is that
animation libraries
do a lot of the work inside
a requestAnimationFrame handler.
And that's good, it gives you
a lot of flexibility and power.
But it means that if any work
happens that blocks the main thread,
that requestAnimationFrame handler
is also gonna get blocked.
And what that means is that your
animation is gonna be blocking.
If you can do things using CSS instead,
then the CSS animation will often
happen completely off the main thread.
And so it will be uninterrupted by
any work that is happening elsewhere
in the application.
And so what it does is it simulates
running the transition ahead of time.
As soon as we begin the transition,
Svelte will call that CSS method with all
of the values between 0 and 1 immediately.
So call it with t equals 0,
t equals 0.1, t equals to 0.2,
and everything all the way up to 1.
It will collect the return values, and
it will turn it into a CSS animation
that looks a little bit like this.
And that's how we can tell the element
that it needs to fade in and out.
It's a little bit boring though,
we can get a lot more ambitious.
So now we're gonna create a custom
transition that we're gonna call spin.
And we've got some
boilerplate here already, and
now we've just gotta implement it.
And that spin transition is being
applied to this element down here.
I'm gonna add an easing function.
Use the elasticOut.
And again, that's gonna take
the value between 0 and 1 and
give us another value on the same scale.
And we're gonna add a transform,
which is gonna
change the scale and
the rotation of the element
And we're also gonna change the color.
I'm using HSL colors because it's
really convenient to be able to
interpolate between different hues
without changing other things.
It's a much better color space to work in
if you're doing interpolation than RGB.
So we need to turn it into an integer,
this is what this double tilde means.
I'm just gonna multiply t, which is
from 0 to 1, multiply that by 360,
because that's the color scale,
it's a 360 degree color wheel.
That's the hue value.
The saturation is gonna be,
The minimum of 100 and
this value,
don't need to know too much about,
What that's doing,
we'll just see the result in a second.
Okay, and if I've done this correctly,
then now when I make this visible,
It's gonna spin in and
change color in a gratuitous fashion.
And again, this is all happening with CSS,
even though we've got a lot
of very custom logic.
And we're using an easing function, the
elasticOut easing function that you don't
get when you're writing CSS animations.
We're able to do all of this
logic-driven animation in a way that
runs as a CSS animation.
And that's high performance and
it's also kind to your phone's battery,
more so than using
a requestAnimationFrame handler.